[SVLS-6531] Create doc for GCP cloud run function gen 1 SCL (#28418)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/serverless/google_cloud_run/functions_gen1.md

{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="java" >}}
1. **Install dependencies**. Run the following commands in the terminal of your source directory:
   ```shell
   wget -O dd-java-agent.jar 'https://dtdg.co/latest-java-tracer'
   wget -O dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar 'https://dtdg.co/latest-serverless-compat-java-agent'
   ```
   You can also install the tracer using the following Maven dependency:
   ```xml
   <plugin>
       <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
       <artifactId>maven-antrun-plugin</artifactId>
       <version>1.8</version>
       <executions>
           <execution>
               <phase>initialize</phase>
               <configuration>
                   <tasks>
                       <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-java-tracer" dest="dd-java-agent.jar" />
                        <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-serverless-compat-java-agent" dest="dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar" />
                   </tasks>
               </configuration>
               <goals>
                   <goal>run</goal>
               </goals>
           </execution>
       </executions>
   </plugin>

>    ```

Author: That is a good point I don't want it to be assumed that we are recommending maven or the plugin. I will move this down to the example section

   ```
   you can also install the tracer using the following maven dependency:
   ```xml
   <plugin>
       <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
       <artifactId>maven-antrun-plugin</artifactId>
       <version>1.8</version>
       <executions>
           <execution>
               <phase>initialize</phase>
               <configuration>
                   <tasks>
                       <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-java-tracer" dest="dd-java-agent.jar" />
                        <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-serverless-compat-java-agent" dest="dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar" />
                   </tasks>
               </configuration>
               <goals>
                   <goal>run</goal>
               </goals>
           </execution>
       </executions>
   </plugin>
   ```

   Datadog recommends using the latest versions of both `datadog-serverless-compat` and `ddtrace` to ensure you have access to enhancements and bug fixes.

2. **Initialize the Datadog Java tracer and serverless compatibility layer**. Add `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` to your runtime environment variable:
   

>    [Auto instruments][1], the java tracer by setting the Runtime environment variable to wrap your Java cloud function with the Datadog Java tracer and the serverless compatibility layer.

Author: `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` allows you to specify the initialization of jars. This will  launch the datadog agents using `-javaagent` option

>    [Auto instruments][1], the java tracer by setting the Runtime environment variable to wrap your Java cloud function with the Datadog Java tracer and the serverless compatibility layer.

Reviewer: Right - I'm more confused about the paragraph about auto instruments, since the intro paragraph describing `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` and the table providing more information kind of feel interrupted. But I don't really understand why!

6. **Configure Datadog intake**. Add the following environment variables to your function's application settings:

   | Name | Value |
   | ---- | ----- |
   | `DD_API_KEY` | Your [Datadog API key][1]. |
   | `DD_SITE` | Your [Datadog site][2]. For example, {{< region-param key=dd_site code="true" >}}. |

7. **Configure Unified Service Tagging**. You can collect metrics from your Cloud Run Function by installing the [Google Cloud integration][6]. To correlate these metrics with your traces, first set the `env`, `service`, and `version` tags on your resource in GC. Then, configure the following environment variables. You can add custom tags as `DD_TAGS`.

   | Name | Value |
   | ---- | ----- |
   | `DD_ENV` | How you want to tag your env for [Unified Service Tagging][9]. For example, `prod`. |
   | `DD_SERVICE` | How you want to tag your service for [Unified Service Tagging][9].  |
   | `DD_VERSION` | How you want to tag your version for [Unified Service Tagging][9]. |
   | `DD_TAGS` | Your comma-separated custom tags. For example, `key1:value1,key2:value2`.  |

8. **Add Service Label**. Tag your GCP entity with the `service` label to correlate your traces with your service:

>    Add the same value from `DD_SERVICE` to a `service` label on your cloud function's inside the info panel of your function. More information on how to add labels can be found [here][12].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Add the same value from `DD_SERVICE` to a `service` label on your cloud function, inside the info panel of your function. For more information on how to add labels, see Google Cloud's [Configure labels for services][12] documentation.
```
I've been going through and replacing link text to make it less generic, which is really helpful for users who are using screen readers. If they're tabbing through links to find a specific one, descriptive link text is a huge help 🙂

Reviewer: Of course!!

   | Name      | Value                                                 |
   |-----------|-------------------------------------------------------|

>    | `service` | The name of your service matching `DD_SERVICE` env var |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | `service` | The name of your service matching the `DD_SERVICE` env var. |
```

---
title: Legacy Google Cloud Run Functions Gen 1
---

## Overview
This page explains how to collect traces, trace metrics, runtime metrics, and custom metrics from your Cloud Run Functions Gen 1 (formerly known as Cloud Functions) utilizing serverless compatibility layer. 

This page is **only for legacy 1st Gen Cloud Run Functions**. For Gen 2 support, see [2nd Gen Functions][8], and to collect additional metrics, install the [Google Cloud integration][6].

<div class="alert alert-info">Google has integrated Cloud Run functions into Cloud Run UI. Starting August 2025, creating legacy 1st Gen functions will only be possible using the Google Cloud CLI, API, or Terraform. Datadog recommends upgrading your cloud run function to Gen 2 for more features and Datadog support. Reach out to Google for more information on the migration to Cloud Run.</div>

## Setup

{{< programming-lang-wrapper langs="nodejs,python,java" >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="nodejs" >}}
1. **Install dependencies**. Run the following commands:
   ```shell
   npm install @datadog/serverless-compat
   npm install dd-trace
   ```

>    To use [automatic instrumentation][1], you must use `dd-trace` v5.25+.

Reviewer 2: Can be removed. This only applies to Azure Function automatic instrumentation

   Datadog recommends pinning the package versions and regularly upgrading to the latest versions of both `@datadog/serverless-compat` and `dd-trace` to ensure you have access to enhancements and bug fixes.

2. **Start the Datadog serverless compatibility layer and initialize the Node.js tracer**. Add the following lines to your main application entry point file (for example, `app.js`):

   ```js
   require('@datadog/serverless-compat').start();

   // This line must come before importing any instrumented module. 
   const tracer = require('dd-trace').init()
   ```

3. (Optional) **Enable runtime metrics**. See [Node.js Runtime Metrics][2].

4. (Optional) **Enable custom metrics**. See [Metric Submission: DogStatsD][3].

[1]: /tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/?tab=singlestepinstrumentation
[2]: /tracing/metrics/runtime_metrics/?tab=nodejs
[3]: /metrics/custom_metrics/dogstatsd_metrics_submission/?code-lang=nodejs
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="python" >}}
1. **Install dependencies**. Run the following commands:
   ```shell
   pip install datadog-serverless-compat
   pip install ddtrace
   ```

>    To use [automatic instrumentation][1], you must use `dd-trace` v2.19+.

Reviewer 2: Can be removed. This only applies to Azure Function automatic instrumentation

   ```
   you can also install the tracer using the following maven dependency:
   ```xml
   <plugin>
       <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
       <artifactId>maven-antrun-plugin</artifactId>
       <version>1.8</version>
       <executions>
           <execution>
               <phase>initialize</phase>
               <configuration>
                   <tasks>
                       <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-java-tracer" dest="dd-java-agent.jar" />
                        <get src="https://dtdg.co/latest-serverless-compat-java-agent" dest="dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar" />
                   </tasks>
               </configuration>
               <goals>
                   <goal>run</goal>
               </goals>
           </execution>
       </executions>
   </plugin>
   ```

   Datadog recommends using the latest versions of both `datadog-serverless-compat` and `ddtrace` to ensure you have access to enhancements and bug fixes.

2. **Initialize the Datadog Java tracer and serverless compatibility layer**. Add `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` to your runtime environment variable:
   

>    [Auto instruments][1], the java tracer by setting the Runtime environment variable to wrap your Java cloud function with the Datadog Java tracer and the serverless compatibility layer.

Reviewer 2: Is "wrap" the right word? Maybe something like "instrument" instead?

   | Name      | Value |
   |-----------| ----- |

>    | `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` | `-javaagent:dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ` |

Reviewer 2: Should we be assuming that customers are placing these jars in the root directory? Maybe we can mimic the instructions in the Java Tracer installation doc since it doesn't make assumptions about where the jars are located.

https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd_libraries/java/?tab=wget
```
-javaagent:/path/to/dd-java-agent.jar
```

3. (Optional) **Enable runtime metrics**. See [Java Runtime Metrics][2].

4. (Optional) **Enable custom metrics**. See [Metric Submission: DogStatsD][3].

[1]: /tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd_libraries/java/?tab=wget
[2]: /tracing/metrics/runtime_metrics/?tab=java
[3]: /metrics/custom_metrics/dogstatsd_metrics_submission/?code-lang=java
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

5. **Deploy your function**. Utilize `gcloud` or Google Console to dpeloy your cloud function gen 1:

   Follow this [Google Cloud Doc][10] to utilize `gcloud function deploy <FUNCTION_NAME> --no-gen2` to deploy a 1st Gen Cloud Run Function.

>    Utilize the `--source` flag to point to the directory of your function code with `dd-java-agent.jar` and `dd-serverless-compat-java-agent.jar` at the top level.

Reviewer 2: Is having the jars located at the top level the only way this will work? What if they are placed inside another directory (or nested even further)?

Author: Good point! I'll update the message to clarify that the source directory should include both JAR files, without specifically requiring them to be at the top level.

   return "Welcome To Datadog! 💜"
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="java" >}}
```java
// Example of a simple Cloud Run Function with traces and custom metrics
package com.example;

import com.google.cloud.functions.HttpFunction;
import com.google.cloud.functions.HttpRequest;
import com.google.cloud.functions.HttpResponse;
import java.io.BufferedWriter;
import com.timgroup.statsd.NonBlockingStatsDClientBuilder;
import com.timgroup.statsd.StatsDClient;

public class Example implements HttpFunction {
  @Override
  public void service(HttpRequest request, HttpResponse response) throws Exception {
    StatsDClient Statsd = new NonBlockingStatsDClientBuilder()
            .hostname("localhost")
            .port(8125)
            .build();
    BufferedWriter writer = response.getWriter();

>     Statsd.incrementCounter("ninja.func.sent", new String[]{"runtime:java"});

Reviewer 2: Maybe use a more generically named metric?
